---
title: Never ask about pointers again
description: Explaning pointers Until I go insane
author: 0xUndefined
date: 2024-09-08 13:00:00 +0800
categories:
  - Coding
tags:
  - Coding
  - Programming
  - C
  - C++
pin: true
comments: false
---


<H1>What are Pointers</H1> 
- Pointers are **derived** variables just like other data types but the main **difference** is that they hold memory addresses not values.
Example of a simple pointer:

```c
int k = 2; 
int *ptr =  &k;
```
- Notice to declare a pointer we use `*` , and to get the memory address of the variable k we use the `&` operator. 
Why would we want a memory address instead of a value in the first place? 
First let think of memory like being a street it is made of blocks (houses), each house holds a value (person) and the same houses have an address (memory address), obviously you send your address not your house to your friend no?


```c 

#include <stdio.h>

int main(){

	int k = 2;
	int *ptr = &k;
	printf("Memory address of k:%p\nValue of k %d\n",&k,k);
	printf("Value of ptr: %p\nValue after deferencing %d\n",ptr,*ptr);
	return 0;
}
/* Sample Output:
Memory address of k:0x7ffecd8fc4bc
Value of k 2
Value of ptr: 0x7ffecd8fc4bc
Value after dereferencing 2
*/
```

- As expected they share the same memory address, and the same value,one new thing is that to access a the original value pointer by the pointer we need to deference it first we can use the `*` to do so.
- Pointers Do have memory address to to access them we can use `&`  example:  

```c

#include <stdio.h>

int main(){
	int k = 2; 
	int *ptr = &k;
	printf("Memory address of k: %p\n",&k);
	printf("Memory address of ptr: %p\n",&ptr);
	return 0;
}
/*Sample Output:
Memory address of k: 0x7ffdb8c7749c
Memory address of ptr: 0x7ffdb8c774a0
*/

```

- Memory addresses are displayed in hex that why we use `%p` also pointers size are larger than other data types we can access the size of a data type using `siezof();` to display the size on the current architecture.


```c 
#include <stdio.h>
int main(){
	printf("\nsize of an int: %d\n",sizeof(int));
	printf("Size of an int pointer: %d\n",sizeof(int *));

	return 0;
}
/*Sample output 

size of an int: 4
Size of an int pointer: 8

*/
```

- The size well be different depending on the architecture you are running on but most of the modern day systems runs x64 or x86 which is also rare. 
- I highly recommend you playing around with sizeof with other data types like chat,doubles,floats etc...
 ***Note**
- Notice in the below sample output that the difference between the memory address is 4 but aren't pointers 8 bytes of size? 
Well the short answer is that the gcc compiler knows how many bytes to copy in the memory location of that variable. 


```txt
/*Sample Output:
Memory address of k: 0x7ffdb8c7749c
Memory address of ptr: 0x7ffdb8c774a0
*/
```
<H1>Pointers arithmetic</H1> 

- For example let us consider a block of memory containing 5 int elements with the address of 100 (decimal) that is 20 of bytes set aside by the compiler, 
Now we want our pointer variable to point at the second integer (since pointers point by default to the first element). We can just add number 1 to the ptr xD.
`ptr++` and since the compiler knows this is a pointer (memory address) it is going to look into the next memory address and assign it to it, small note it doesn't add 1 it adds the size of the integer xD. 
<H1>Arrays and pointers</H1> 

- Arrays and pointers tend to have an interesting relationship between each other since an array doesn't directly hold the value but rather points also to a value that means that doing such thing as below would be legal.


```c 
#include <stdio.h>
int array[6]={1,2,3,4,5,6};
int *ptr=NULL;
int main(){
	ptr = array;
	printf("Array poiting at: %p ptr poiting at:%p\n",array,ptr);
	return 0;
}
/*sample output
Array poiting at: 0x64a6d635f020
ptr poiting at:0x64a6d635f020
*/
```

- Notice how they're pointing at the same memory address which means we can do something like this: 

```c 
#include <stdio.h>
int array[6]={1,2,3,4,5,6};
int *ptr=NULL;
int main(){
	ptr = array;

	for(int i = 0 ; i < 6; i++){
		printf("array[%d] = %d\n",i,array[i]);
		printf("ptr:+ %d =  %d\n",i, (*ptr)++;
		}
	return 0;
}
/* Sample out put
array[0]: 1 
ptr+0:    1 
array[1]: 2 
ptr+1:    2 
array[2]: 3 
ptr+2:    3 
array[3]: 4 
ptr+3:    4 
array[4]: 5 
ptr+4:    5 
array[5]: 6 
ptr+5:    6 
*/
```

 Let discuss why `ptr= NULL;` :
 - It is good practice to make a pointer point to nothing (NULL) when initialized specially if it isn't going to be used.
 - To avoid undefined behavior or weird behavior. 
 - Also assigning null to pointer means that something went wrong.
 Let talk about this `printf("ptr:+ %d =  %d\n",i, (*ptr)++;`  what exactly does `(*ptr)++` Do? 
 First it deference the ptr then jumps to the next memory address there no difference between `(*ptr)++` and `*ptr++` or even `*(ptr)+i` try playing around with the code and you try predicting the output each time(they well be the same).   
 Let get back to out topic arrays and pointers have almost the same behavior. 
 However they are similar but **NOT** the same: 
 We can do `ptr = array` but cannot `array = ptr` The reason behind it. while ptr is a variable and dynamic array is constant. That means when the first element of the array `array[0]` is assigned it cannot be changed.
 Other writers tend to name arrays constant pointers. Hence let try to understand what they mean by "constant" in that term,Looking back at the variable definition When we declare a variable we tell the compiler to set a side a block of memory in the ram to be used by that specific variable which can be accessed in two ways either being an lvalue or rvalue (It doesn't make sense but lvalue rvalue you well understand from this example)
 
```c
 int k = 2; 

```

k is a left value the value that well receive the rvalue and 2 is the rvalue.
Back the the topic when the variable used on the left side the compiler interprets as memory location to move to that value resulting from evaluation of the right side of the assignment operator. But, when used on the right side of the assignment operator, the name of a variable is interpreted to mean the contents stored at that memory address set aside to hold the value of that variable.
From that since array is constant once the compiler establishes where the array it self is to be stored and on seeing: `ptr = array`,it simply uses this address as a constant in the code segment and there is no referencing of the data segment beyond that, just reading it well make absolutely no sense, hopefully you can understand from this example: 

```c
int a,b;
a = 2; 
b = a; 
```

From above we tell the compiler to set a  block of memory with the size of 4 bytes with name a and same for b. 
In second line we index in the memory address of a and we assign a value of 2 to it, while in the 3rd line we can tell that the compiler index into the memory address of a (&a) and put the value into &b makes sense no? While a and b are object 2 isn't an object.
From the above example we can tell the same logic well apply to below: 

```c
 ptr = array;
```
- Since ptr is an object we can index into the memory address of array and assign it to ptr, and `array = ptr` would be illegal xD.
<H1>Pointers and Strings</H1> 

In c strings are represented as an array of chars while in other languages like pascal, B, etc ... they have their own data type. 
Strings well help us understand more about pointers and arrays, how pointers are passed into functions, and implementing some string lib functions like `strcpy` `strlen`.

 **How is a string declared**
- The main thing in strings is that a string should always end with a null byte referenced as `\0` to determine the end of string 

```c
char string[4];
string[0]= 'l';
string[1]= 'o';
string[2]= 'l'
string[3]= '\0';
```
- Building a string like this is a pain in the ass that why we can use double quotes to achieve kinda the same thing as declaring a char:

```c
char string[4]="lol";
```

- Keep in mind that we don't need to declare an null byte at the end since the compiler well take care of that for us

```c
#include <stdio.h>

void my_strcpy(char * dst,char * src){
   while(*src !='\0'){
      *dst++=*src++;
}
    *dst='\0';
}

int main(){
   char string1[64]="Testing";
   char string2[64];
   my_strcpy(string2,string1);
   printf("%s\n",string1);
   printf("%s\n",string2);
   return 0;
/*  Output sample: 
Testing
Testing
*/
}
```

- So let discuss what going on let start with the `my_strcpy` function it takes two arguments char pointers destination and source, then it loops until the src equal to an null byte, and since we're manipulating memory address it well work xD. 
- Notice how we declared an array and passed it to a function takes accepts pointer which means that pointers are **similar** to arrays  but not the same.
- Since we're treating the  array as pointer we need to assign a null byte to the end of the string.
- Keep in mind something like this

```c
void my_strcpy(char * dst,char * src);
void my_strcpy(char  dst[],char src[]);
```

While both of them would work it is better to treat arrays in functions as pointer since C looses track of the arrays size && much more.
